# Attachment 2 -- Mission Types

1. AIR INTERDICTION- Air interdiction, to include both lethal and non-lethal systems, is employed to destroy, disrupt, divert, or delay the enemy's surface military potential before it can effectively engage friendly forces, or otherwise achieve its objectives. Destruction of the enemy surface force is the most direct of the effects of air interdiction. Disruption of enemy surface forces can be accomplished in a number of ways. This can include traditional supply targets such as ammunition or POL, LOCs used to transport the enemy force into combat, C2 systems that the enemy army requires to fight effectively, or anything else that the enemy force depends on for success in combat. Different types of Air Interdiction missions are defined based upon the types of targets encountered. a. Pre-planned Air Interdiction (AI). AI is the designation given to air interdiction missions against pre-planned targets in the ATO. This mode is used to hit specific targets that are known in advance, and detailed intelligence information is available to support strike planning.

    1. Airborne Alert Attack for TSTs (AATK). AATK is the ATO designation for Airborne Alert Attack missions assigned with the objective of attrition of designated enemy systems on the TST list. AATK missions will be assigned to an AOR in which the targeted enemy systems are detected or suspected.

    2. Airborne Alert Interdiction for TSTs (AAI). AAI is the mission designation in the ATO for TST prosecution when the general location of TSTs is not known. Target type will determine the level of approval authority and degree of coordination required. Assignment to AAI in the ATO means you are placed in an area to hold, pending location and/or identification of a TST to strike.

    3. Armed Reconnaissance (AREC). AREC is the designation for armed reconnaissance, also known as "armed recce" in the ATO. It is a form of air interdiction that is planned against a particular area, rather than a particular target. Armed reconnaissance is normally flown into areas where lucrative targets on the CPT list are known or suspected to exist, or where mobile enemy surface units have moved to as a result of ground fighting. The area may be defined by as a stretch of an LOC such as a railroad, highway, or river. AREC missions must satisfy deconfliction measures and any additional ROE prior to striking any targets discovered in their AOR.

    4. Strike Coordination and Reconnaissance (SCR). SCR is the designation for missions planned against a particular area for targets on the CPT list. The baseline SCR mission assignment, also known as Killer-Scout, is to find and PID targets for coordinated strikes by other force application assets. The SCR is a facilitator of target detection and pairing within a prescribed AOR. When working with other assets to coordinate an attack, the authority to engage or abort must be considered as equal among the entities. ROE, PID, CDE and deconfliction are shared responsibilities between SCR and the assets they coordinate with to attack targets. Any asset has the authority to suspend or abort an attack if coordination measures do not comply with established criteria for a given attack platform. SCR leads are not trained to provide CAS terminal control, and should never be used to control attacks inside close proximity to friendly ground forces.

2. COUNTER AIR- The objectives of the counter-air function are to enable friendly operations against the enemy and protect friendly forces and vital assets through control of the air. Counter-air is directed at enemy forces and target sets that directly (airborne aircraft, surface-to-air missiles) or indirectly (airfields; petroleum, oils, and lubricants; command and control facilities) challenge control of the air. Counter-air consists of offensive and defensive operations. Offensive Counter Air consists of offensive operations aimed at destroying, disrupting, or degrading enemy air and missile threats. Defensive Counter Air includes actions taken against enemy aircraft and missile attacks.

    1. Offensive Counter Air- Offensive Counter Air includes targets such as enemy air defense systems (aircraft, antiaircraft artillery, and surface-to-air missiles), airfields and supporting infrastructure, theater missiles (cruise and ballistic), ground-, sea-, and air-based launch platforms and its supporting infrastructure. Different types of Offensive Counter Air operations are designated to achieve specific counter-air objectives.

    2. Surface Attack (OCA). OCA is designation in the ATO given to Surface Attack missions against pre-planned offensive counter air targets. Surface Attack missions are intended to destroy, disrupt, or degrade select offensive counter-air targets on the ground. These missions are directed against enemy air and missile threats and their support infrastructure (e.g., airfields, launch sites, launchers, runways) before launch. The main goal is to prevent enemy air and missile assets from being employed. While many TSTs are offensive counter air targets, the designation AATK or AAI is used to cover missions tasked against the highest-level dynamic targets, regardless of doctrinal categorization.

    3. Fighter Sweep (SWEP). SWEP is the designation in the ATO given to Fighter Sweep missions. The fighter sweep is an offensive mission by fighter aircraft to seek out and destroy enemy airborne target sets such as aircraft, airborne missile launch platforms, and airborne targets of opportunity independent of other strike operations.

    4. Escort (ESC). ESC is the designation in the ATO given to Escort missions. Escort missions are protection sorties flown over enemy territory against enemy aircraft and air defense systems. Escort missions may be either close or detached with respect to the escorted entity. Friendly aircraft, enroute to or from a target area, may be assigned escort aircraft to protect them from enemy air-to-air threats. Escort aircraft may be tasked to protect such missions as interdiction, reconnaissance, airlift, search and rescue, aerial, airborne C2, and electronic warfare.

    5. Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses (SEAD). SEAD is the designation in the ATO given to Suppression of Enemy Air Defense missions. SEAD is an offensive counter air mission designed to neutralize, destroy, or temporarily degrade enemy surface-based air defenses by destructive or disruptive means. SEAD requirements may vary according to mission objectives, system capabilities, and threat complexity.

3. DEFENSIVE COUNTER AIR- The objective of Defensive Counter Air is to protect friendly forces and vital interests from enemy air and missile attacks and is synonymous with air defense. Defensive Counter Air consists of active and passive air defense operations including all defensive measures designed to destroy attacking enemy air and missile threats or to nullify or reduce the effectiveness of such attacks should they escape destruction. The basic active defense criteria to detect, identify, intercept, and destroy remains the same for air and missile threats. Defensive Counter Air missions for fighters include Area Defense, Point Defense, and High Value Airborne Asset (HVAA) protection.

    1. Area Defense (DCA). DCA is the designation for ATO assigned Area Defense fighter missions with a known area or lane to defend over friendly territory for a specific time period. Area defense missions are conducted for the defense of a broad area using a combination of weapon systems.

    2. Combat Air Patrol (CAP). CAP is the designation for Point Defense fighter missions known as Combat Air Patrol (CAP) for a specific time period. CAP missions are conducted for the protection of a limited area, normally in defense of the vital elements of forces and installations.

    3. High Value Airborne Asset (HVAA) Protection (BRCAP). BRCAP is the designation for fighter missions assigned as a Barrier CAP in defense of HVAAs for a specific time period. HVAA protection uses fighter aircraft to protect critical airborne theater assets such as AWACS and Tankers.

4. STRATEGIC ATTACK- Strategic Attack is offensive action conducted by command authorities. Strategic attack generates effects at the strategic level that attain or directly support attainment of strategic-level objectives. It is not focused upon defeat of enemy military forces. Strategic attack is not tied to specific weapon systems or delivery platforms.

    1. Strategic Attack (SA). SA is the designation in the ATO given to Strategic Attack missions against pre-planned strategic targets. While many TSTs are strategic in nature, the designation AAI or AATK is used to cover missions tasked against the highest level dynamic targets.

5. CLOSE AIR SUPPORT- Close Air Support is defined as air action by fixed and rotary-wing aircraft against hostile targets which are in close proximity to friendly forces and which require detailed integration of each air mission with the fire and movement of those forces. CAS is not defined by a specific region of the theater; rather it can be conducted at any place and time friendly surface forces are in close proximity to enemy forces.

    1. Close Air Support-Scheduled (CAS). CAS is the designation in the ATO given to pre-planned Close Air Support missions with a time-on-target (TOT), and where a need for CAS has been established in advance. Scheduled CAS missions will normally have a specific contact point or area, at a specific time, to expect handoff to a air-based Forward Air Controller (FAC). Scheduled CAS missions are the most likely to have good intelligence on the expected type of target, resulting in a better munitions-target match. Although a specific target must be identified when requesting scheduled CAS, the reality of fluid battlefield environments makes identifying a CAS target days in advance very difficult and may not match those listed in the ATO. Final target determination is at the discretion of the supported ground component.

    2. Close Air Support-On Call (GCAS). GCAS is the designations given to air alert or ground alert CAS during a pre-planned time period when the need for CAS is likely, but not guaranteed. GCAS sorties will remain on alert status until scrambled by their Wing Operations Center (WOC). Specific target types will be unknown prior to launch.

    3. Forward Air Controller-Airborne (FAC). FAC is the designation in the ATO given to FAC missions. The FAC coordinates air-strikes between a TAC and CAS aircraft. The FAC provides terminal control, relays CAS briefings, provides immediate target and threat reconnaissance, and marks targets for the attacking aircraft.
