# vAFI 36-103 Promotions, Discharges and Vacancies

<p style="text-align: center; font-weight:bold">COMPLIANCE WITH THIS INSTRUCTION IS MANDATORY</p>

!!! info "Revision Info"
    - Document Number: vAFI 36-103
    - Date: 05 Mar 2022
    - OPR: vUSAF/CS
    - Supersedes: 01 Aug 2002, 05 Sep 2009, 26 Oct 2009, 09 May 2010, 11 May 2012, 03 Mar 2013, 19 Jan 2018, 10 Jun 2019, 30 Apr 2020, 23 May 2020, 19 Aug 2020, 22 Sep 2020
    - Certified by: Chief of Staff

1. **PURPOSE:** The purpose of this directive is to not only to revise last known promotional policy but also to also identify and address specific areas within the vUSAF organization concerning promotions and vacancies and establish written formal policy for those areas. This guidance will address the following areas:

    1. Establish criteria and timetable for regular promotion of vUSAF personnel.

    2. Establish performance review reports of vUSAF personnel (OPR Reports).

    3. Establish formal application, interview and review process of VUSAF personnel in regards to promotions and filling of vacancies.

    4. Establish written directive concerning the advertisement of vacancies.

    5. Establish rank requirements & limitations for vUSAF staff positions.

    6. Establishes policy for separation from the vUSAF and the return of prior members.

2. **Regular Promotions of VUSAF Personnel:** This section addresses regular promotion of eligible vUSAF personnel by establishing criteria and timetables for promotion for personnel wishing to advance in rank and / or position. The Director of Personnel/A1 will generate a list of pilots eligible to go up for promotion two (2) weeks prior to the opening of the testing period in January or July. This list will be posted in NOTAMS in vUSAF Discord.

    Once the list is posted all Commanders in that pilot's Chain of Command, (Squadron/CC to Wing/CC to NAF/CC to MAJCOM/CC to A3) shall score the pilot's performance between 1 and 5, with 5 being the highest, and forward this to the Director of Personnel/A1 at your earliest convenience.

    1. **Promotional Criteria Established:** Effective the date of enactment of this document, all personnel shall be eligible for rank promotion if they have met all of the following criteria:

        1. Remain active as defined in 36-100 section 1.2 FLYING REQUIREMENTS

        2. Must have a minimum of 50 flight hours to be eligible for vCaptain, 100 hours for vMajor, 150 hours for vLtColonel and 200 hours for vColonel.

        3. Have not been the subject of disciplinary action within 90-days of the established testing period.

        4. Receive a minimum score of 21 on your Officer Performance Reports for the quarter prior to examination.

        5. Served the minimum time in grade for each rank: vCaptain - 3 months; vMajor - 4 months; vLtColonel - 5 months; and vColonel - six months.

        6. If vCaptain or above be appropriately serving as an Instructor Pilot in their assigned unit.

        7. For promotion to vLtColonel or vColonel must be currently serving as a squadron or wing commander or not eligible.

        8. Complete the appropriate written examination for the rank for which you are testing for and pass said exam with a 70% or higher score. Exams are generated by Air Staff personnel and managed by vAFPC / vAETC.

        9. Once all of the above criterion is met the Officer will be scored on a merit matrix and only those in the top 80% will be promoted. The matrix competitive scores are within the same rank -- vCaptain vs vCaptain etc.

        10. The matrix will be scored by the vUSAF Director of Personnel/A1.

            How the matrix works. It scores each pilot candidate in five (5) areas: 1) It awards points for every point above an OPR score of 21, 2) it awards one point for each flight hour flown in the six months prior to the test month, 3) it awards one point for each month the pilot has been a member of the vUSAF, 4) it averages the score (from 1-5 points) awarded by each Officer in the pilot candidates Chain of Command up to the Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations/A3, 5) it considers a passing exam score. It then generates a Candidate Selection Index score and if the pilot is in the 80th percentile they are promoted (21% to 100%).

    2. **Promotion Schedule established:** Promotional examinations shall be offered semi- annually. Members seeking promotion and have met the requirements will take the exam in the months of January and July.

    3. **Rank and Positions established:** The following are the available ranks within the Virtual United States Air Force (VUSAF) and their associated requirements listed lowest to highest:

        | **Rank**  | **Minimum Longevity**  | **Minimum Requirements**  | **Specific**  |
        |:---: |:---: |:---: |:---: |
        |     Recruit     |     N/A     |     N/A     |           |
        |     O-1 2nd vLieutenant     |     Complete IFT     |     Complete IFT     |           |
        |     O-2 1st vLieutenant     |     Complete AETC   Primary Training     |     Complete AETC   Primary Training     |           |
        |     O-3 vCaptain     |     3 Months Service   as O-2     |     Complete AETC   Primary Training & O-3 Promotional Exam     |     Squadron / CC     |
        |     O-4 vMajor     |     4 Months Service   as O-3     |     Complete O-4   Promotional Exam     |     Line Officer /   Flight Leader     Squadron / Wing     |
        |     O-5 vLt. Colonel     |     5 Months Service   as O-4     |     Complete O-5   Promotional Exam, currently serving as Sqdrn/Wing commander.     Endorsement from   MAJCOM Commander[^1]     |     Squadron / Wing /   CC     |
        |     O-6 vColonel     |     6 Months Service   as O-5     |     Complete O-6   Promotional Exam, currently serving as Sqdrn/Wing commander.     Endorsement from   MAJCOM Commander[^2]     |     Squadron / Wing /   CC     Deputy Commander     |
        |     O-7 vBrigadier General     |     3 Months Service   as O-6     |     Complete O-7   Promotional Exam, serve as Wing Commander, Receive CoS Appointment     |     Intermediate   Staff Position           Deputy Commander   or MAJCOM Commander     |
        |     O-8 vMajor   General     |     3 Months Service   as O-7     |     Complete O-8   Promotional Exam, serve as Wing Commander, Receive CoS Appointment     |     Senior Staff           Deputy Commander   or MAJCOM Commander     |
        |     O-9 vLt. General     |     Receive CoS   Appointment     |     Receive CoS   Appointment     |     Senior Command           Including MAJCOM     |
        |     O-10 vGeneral     |     Receive CoS   Appointment     |     Receive CoS Appointment     |     VCoS and A3     |

        Note: O-11 vGeneral of the Air Force -- is only held by Robert Phillips and James Pheibush as Chief of Staff Emeritus.

        MAJCOM/CC may be an O-7, O-8 or O-9. NAF/CC may be an O-6, O-7 or O-8. This depends on length of service and other considerations at the discretion of the Chief of Staff.

    4. **Limitations Established:** Rank not only serves to recognize members for their longevity and accomplishments, it also indicates the level of responsibility that a member of a given rank has obligated to maintain to further the enjoyment of all vUSAF membership. Therefore, rank above the level of vMajor shall only be issued / filled when an associated position of Squadron / Wing Commander or higher are available. The below chart shall identify the positions associated with each rank within the vUSAF:

        | **Rank**  | **Position**  |
        |:---: |:---: |
        |     Recruit / Cadet     |     AETC – Pilot Training Program Student     |
        |     O-1 2nd vLieutenant     |     AETC – Pilot Training Program Student     |
        |     O-2 1st vLieutenant     |     Line Officer     |
        |     O-3 vCaptain     |     Line Officer / Flight Leader – Squadron Commander     |
        |     O-4 vMajor     |     Line Officer / Flight Leader – Squadron / Wing Commander     |
        |     O-5 vLt. Colonel     |     Line Officer / Squadron / Wing Commander     |
        |     O-6 vColonel     |     Squadron / Wing Commander / Deputy MAJCOM     |
        |     O-7 vBrigadier General     |     MAJCOM or Deputy MAJCOM/CC     |
        |     O-8 vMajor General     |     MAJCOM or Deputy MAJCOM Commander     Senior Air Staff     |
        |     O-9 vLt. General     |     MAJCOM Commander     Senior Air Staff     |
        |     O-10 vGeneral     |     Rank only held by CoS, VCoS, and A3     |

    5. **Reduction in rank as a result of loss of staff position:** In instances whereby, a member holds a rank of O-5 or higher, that vacates a staff position for a lesser position, that person shall be reduced in rank to the highest maximum rank as indicated in the chart in section 2.4 for the new position that is occupied.

        If an Air Staff, Majcom or Deputy MAJCOM Commander returns to Line Officer status they shall be reduced to a permanent rank of vColonel in recognition of their service to the vUSAF if they have served in the above command positions at least six months.

        If an Officer vacating a Squadron or Wing Commander position to return to Line Officer status is a vColonel they shall be reduced in rank to vLtColonel.

        If an Officer vacating a Squadron or Wing Commander position returning to Line Officer status is a vLtColonel they shall be reduced in rank to vMajor.

        In all instances, members shall have promotions and reductions in rank annotated on their form 201 file.

        The vUSAF Chief of Staff may exempt an Officer from reduction in rank pursuant to 2.4 in recognition of meritorious service. This is entirely at the discretion of the Chief of Staff.

    6. **Rank in reference to approval for transfer to Silver Eagle Squadron:** Members who have met the criteria of vAFI 38-102 been approved for transfer to the vUSAF retirement squadron, SILVER EAGLES, shall be returned to their highest attained rank as documented in their form 201 file.

    7. **Discretionary Promotions:** The vUSAF Chief of Staff reserves the right to promote any member to any position and rank to ensure the smooth and consistent operation of the vUSAF as a whole. Those persons that receive a discretionary promotion are obligated to successfully complete all written examinations to the level of the promotion received and do so within the first six months of receiving the promotion.

    8. **Professional Grade Promotions:** In an effort to recognize the professional advancement of certain fields, the vUSAF will recognize the following professionals with an automatic appointment based on professional services. The vUSAF/CS shall approve all professional appointments for the following positions:

        1. WEB DESIGNER -- Persons with the appropriate skills and abilities of web design. Such a person must perform such services for the vUSAF to obtain this appointment. Web Designer is eligible for the grade of 0-4 through 0-8.

        2. AIRCRAFT TEXTURE / PAINT SPECIALIST -- Person with the appropriate skill to alter visual appearance of flight models for the vUSAF and have done so, are eligible for the grade of 0-4 through 0-8.

        3. AIRCRAFT FLIGHT DYNAMICS EDITOR -- Person with the appropriate skill to alter flight characteristics of VUSAF flight models and has done so for the vUSAF is eligible for the grade of 0-4 through 0-8

    9. **Review Board:** Shall be used at the discretion of the CoS. In the event that a position is required for a promotion in rank above O-5 vLt. Colonel, AFPC shall notify the CoS and inquire for possibility of creating a position if none are available. AFPC upon being notified that a position is available shall then follow sections 4.1.4 thru 4.1.6. in preparing a summary report for the member requesting promotion to O-5 vLt. Colonel. Such promotion shall be granted only by the CoS based on the availability of openings and fitness of the individual(s) being considered. In the event that there are openings with more than one qualified candidate, then AFPC will also follow sections 4.1.4 thru 4.1.6. of this document so that CoS may select the most qualified based on the RB recommendations.

3. **Membership Participation Evaluations and Review Established:** This directive hereby establishes the requirement that vUSAF personnel be evaluated on a Bi-Annual basis (May and November) each year by their superior officer as indicated in the chart in section 3.1.9. Evaluations shall be documented on an automated form named "Officer Performance Report or OPR" that critiques each member in the following seven areas:

    1. Activity Level -- Commander indicates how well the member meets or exceeds the minimum hourly obligation as a member per vAFI 36-100 section 1.2.

    2. Communication Skills - Commander indicates how well the member communicates with those around him both in writing and verbally. For example, does the member in question respond to emails in a timely manner, communicate when the member needs a leave of absence, is able to effectively communicate verbally with fellow members via chat rooms and voice servers?

    3. Event Participation -- Commander indicates here how often the member in question participates in online events of various types.

    4. Airmanship Skills -- Commander indicates the overall performance and ability of the member in question to operate the aircraft the member in questioned is assigned.

    5. VUSAF Knowledge - Commander indicates the overall knowledge of vUSAF operations and regulations with the marking the respective value.

    6. VATSIM / VSOA Knowledge -- Commander indicates the overall knowledge of VATSIM and VSOA regulations and operations with marking the respective value.

    7. Overall Ambition and Creativity -- Commander indicates the overall impression they receive through interaction with the individual in question. The evaluator then indicates their opinion of the member by marking the respective value.

    8. **Values defined** -- Rating values are as follows:

        1. Poor -- 1 point value

        2. Below Average -- 2 point value

        3. Average / Adequate -- 3 point value

        4. Above Average -- 4 point value

        5. Excellent -- 5 point value

    9. Chain of Command established for Evaluations:

        | **Evaluators Rank / Position**  | **Rank / Position of those being evaluated**  |
        |:---: |:---: |
        |     AETC / Commander     |     Recruit / Cadet     |
        |     AETC / Commander     |     O-1 2nd vLieutenant     |
        |     Squadron / CC     |     O-2 1st vLieutenant     |
        |     Squadron or Wing / CC     |     O-3 vCaptain     |
        |     Squadron or Wing / CC     |     O-4 vMajor     |
        |     Squadron or Wing / CC     |     O-5 vLt. Colonel     |
        |     MAJCOM/CC or Deputy Commander     |     O-6 vColonel     |
        |     Commander and / or O-8 vMaj. General     |     O-7 vBrig. General     |
        |     Commander and / or O-9 vLt. General     |     O-8 vMaj. General     |
        |     Chief of Staff     |     O-9 vLt. General     |
        |     Chief of Staff     |     O-10 vGeneral     |

    10. **Minimum Score required:** An OPR score of less than 21 points shall be considered unacceptable and the member placed on a 90-day probation in which time the member in question shall improve the score. A second, subsequent failing OPR shall result in the review of the member in question for disposition as deemed necessary by the Chief of Staff or his designee. Members should strive to receive a score of 21 on all of their OPR reports however a score of 21 is considered minimally satisfactory.

    11. **Review of deficient OPR's:** The Chief of Staff or his designee shall review all OPR reports that have been annotated as failing as indicated in section 3.2 of this directive. The reviewer shall solicit and review input from the chain of command of the member in question and then makes a determination for corrective action.

    12. **Corrective Action:** The Chief of Staff or his designee shall make a final determination for corrective action for two consecutive OPR scores below the score of 21. The reviewer may recommend but not limited to: remedial training, reduction in position / rank, termination of position / membership.

4. **Vacant positions:** This section hereby formalizes the procedure for the announcing, application for and filling of various entry, intermediate and senior staff positions within the vUSAF.

    1. **Announcement of Vacancies:** In order to ensure equal opportunity to all of our members, all positions that are vacant and are open for filing shall be announced by posting via Discord NOTAM, Main web site News page and by vUSAF Forum announcement for at least 10 days and not any longer than 30-days.

    2. **Eligibility for Vacancies:** Any member of the vUSAF may apply for any vacancy so as long as they have (A) completed the AETC Pilot Training Program and are considered Mission Ready (MR) and (B) have been an active member within their current billet for three months. If there are special requirements for a specific position, then members must also meet those specific and additional requirements as well.

    3. **Applying for a position:** The interested member shall compile a letter of application for the position desired, highlighting their experience and qualifications both real and virtual. The applicant then shall send the letter through their Chain of Command (CoC) to the CoS and VCoS. Each application shall only be honored for the position applied and not retained on file for any other position.

    4. **Applicant Selection Process:** Upon reaching the deadline for the vacant position, the CoS shall assemble a board of review (BOR). The purpose of the BOR is to assemble and review each letter of application, FORM 201, OPR's, preference points (see section 4.1.6) and other pertinent information on each applicant. The BOR will then interview each candidate to ascertain which of the candidates are the most qualified. The BOR will then generate a summary report on each candidate and forward the reports to the CoS, Deputy CoS, and the gaining commander. The CoS or his designee shall solicit input from the Deputy CoS and the gaining commander and then make a selection based on all of the mentioned information.

    5. **Review Board:** The Review Board shall be comprised of the Chief of Staff, Vice Chief of Staff, Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations/A3, a MAJCOM Commander and other Air Staff Officer at the discretion of the Chief of Staff. In all instances, the RB shall be made up of odd number of sitting officers to ensure no ties are met. The Chief of Staff may delegate the Chair of the Review Board to the VCoS at his discretion.

    6. **Preferential Point System:** To aid the RB in evaluating each candidate for a position, a point system is hereby established to give credit for accomplishments of vUSAF members and they are as follows:

        | **Item of Preference**  | **Point Value**  |
        |:---: |:---: |
        |     Candidate received an endorsement from an Air Staff Member     |     15 points     |
        |     Candidate received an endorsement from a MAJCOM Commander     |     10 points     |
        |     Candidate received an endorsement from a Wing Commander     |     5 points     |
        |     Active Instructor Pilot     |     5 points     |
        |     Previous Position Experience – Air Staff     |     4 points     |
        |     Previous Position Experience – NAF or MAJCOM/CC     |     3 points     |
        |     Previous Position Experience – Wing/CC     |     2 points     |
        |     Previous Position Experience – Squadron/CC     |     1 point     |
        |     ATC/Flight Hours Accrued     |     1 point per 100 hours     |
        |     Number of Awards Earned     |     1 point per ribbon     |
        |     Events Participated in     |     1 point per event     |
        |     Active Longevity     |     1 point per month     |
        |     APR scores at or above 28     |     1 point per report     |
        |     General Discharge within 1 year of application     |     -1 point per General Discharge     |
        |     Dishonorable Discharge within 1 year of application     |     -5 points per Dishonorable Discharge     |

        1. **Staff Endorsements:** Members of staff at or above the position of Wing Commander are empowered to endorse candidates that are being considered for a vacancy position or testing and being reviewed for promotion. A staff member may only endorse one person per vacancy being filled and one person attempting to qualify for promotion as detailed in this instruction. A staff member may only endorse a maximum of 4 personnel per calendar year (Jan thru Dec). Staff members are encouraged to be very conservative and only endorse those members who truly stand out above all others and would be considered vital to the mission for the position the candidate is being considered.

    7. Exempt Positions: Due to the mission critical nature of the below listed positions, they shall be filled by appointment by the vUSAF Chief of Staff or his designee. The VCoS or A3 may temporarily appoint individuals to fill vacancies at the MAJCOM level or below. These are subject to final approval and appointment by the CoS. Vacancies listed in section 4.1.7.1 shall be filled by the procedure indicated in section 4 of this guidance.

        1. **Exempt Positions:**

            1. Air staff Positions

            2. MAJCOM/CC

            3. MAJCOM/XO

            4. NAF/CO

            5. NAF/XO

            6. Any other position indicated by either the VUSAF/CS or VUSAF/VC.

5. **Discharge from service defined:** The vUSAF recognizes that members from time to time resign their staff positions and / or membership for various reasons. This section shall list the various categories of discharges and their associated penalties / benefits. Current members in good standing are welcome and encouraged to return to the vUSAF at any time when their respective situation and desires permit However, it is also the experience of the vUSAF senior staff to recognize a minority of the virtual community that leave and return with rapid frequency with, if at all, minimal justification. Therefore, one of the goals of this section is to encourage current members to remain active and utilize Leave of Absence (LOA) requests (see vAFI 36-100 section 1.6) rather than simply go inactive or resign. Prior to removing a member from the vUSAF the CoS or A3 will be required to perform an exit interview.

    1. **Honorable Discharge** -- Member separated from the vUSAF or their specific billet in good standing and is subject to immediate reinstatement with minimal training requirements in accordance to all VUSAF policies

    2. **General Discharge** -- Member separated from the vUSAF or their specific billet under one or more of the following circumstances:

        1. By request without viable justification.

        2. Due to inactivity / unresponsiveness to their appropriate CoC.

        3. Request Separation from the VUSAF within the first three months of being reinstated without viable justification.

    3. **Dishonorable Discharge** -- member is separated from the vUSAF or their specific billet for one or more of the following circumstances:

        1. As disciplinary action for violation of vUSAF policy.

        2. Due to inactivity / unresponsiveness to their CoC for 2 or more times in a year.

        3. Request Separation from the vUSAF within the first six months of being reinstated for 2 or more times without viable justification.

    4. **Return to Service:** Members who have separated and have received an Honorable Discharge are permitted to return to service within the vUSAF. Upon completing any required training as per vUSAF policy and attaining their Mission Readiness status with their first retuning Billet, shall be eligible to apply for vacancies as they are posted after being active for four weeks from date of return. Members returning to the vUSAF after separating with a General Discharge shall wait a minimum of three months of active participation before being eligible to apply for posted vacancies. Members, who separated from the vUSAF with a Dishonorable Discharge, shall wait a minimum of six months and shall also require the approval of the Chief of Staff before being eligible to apply for posted vacancies.

    5. **Discharges Limited:** vUSAF recognizes a limited number of the membership who are discharged from service by request or through discipline/inactivity only to return at a distant later date, this section establishes the following restriction:

        1. First discharge - No penalty

        2. Second discharge - three-month minimum break in service prior to return of a former member. Break in service time begins on the date of discharge from the vUSAF.

        3. Third discharge - Six-month minimum break in service prior to return of a former member. Break in service time begins on the date of discharge from the vUSAF.

        4. Fourth discharge - permanent discharge from the vUSAF.

        5. The vUSAF/CS or his designee may review and waive this section based on the totality of circumstances through the authority granted by section 6.

6. **Authority of Chief of Staff:** As indicated in section 2.1.7 of this document, the Chief of Staff reserves the authority to appoint any person to any position / rank as that person sees fit to ensure the smooth operation of the vUSAF.

7. **Summary:** One of the most gratifying aspects of military service is being selected for the next higher grade. The VUSAF has tried to create a system that will instill the same sense of accomplishment with respect to our real-world counterparts. Your objective should be to achieve the highest possible rank commensurate with your abilities. Realize that the vUSAF cannot promote everyone into the high-ranking positions, and the competition for those higher positions becomes more intense as you progress. This fair and equitable promotion system exists to achieve all of the goals of the vUSAF organization.

You should understand it, so that you can better appreciate the significance of your successes and better realize the necessary competitiveness of the vUSAF promotions. The vUSAF officer promotion program has served the individual officers and the vUSAF well by continually producing highly qualified and mission ready personnel.

// Signed //

Chief of Staff

[^1]: O-5: Must have helped in planning or moderation of event to include unit level exercises.

[^2]: O-6: Must have helped in planning or commanding of a vUSAF or VSOA sponsored event
